hi everyone and this is Suren Kumar from
EC Department baby senior in college or
a level so today we are discuss about
the concept of bi CMOS technology in the
stream of VLSI circuit into the today's
context what we discussed today bliss
tis so introduction abstract so
characteristics of CMOS technology so
characteristics of bipolar technology so
combined advantages in bi CMOS
technology so bi CMOS fabrication
process and bi CMOS integrated circuits
advantages or bi CMOS transistors and
disadvantages of bi CMOS transistors and
applications of bi CMOS transistors in
comparison between CMOS and bi CMOS and
bi CMOS products in the list of
different bi CMOS products and finally
conclusion so coming to the introduction
and the history of semiconductor devices
so started in the early years of 1930s
so bipolar technology was started in the
year 1980s and similarly the CMOS
technology was also started in the mid
of 1980s so Lateran so 1990s
there was a cross war between so bipolar
technology as well as so CMOS technology
in bi CMOS technology so both so Maus
and bipolar devices or fabricated and
it's same chip that means so previously
how so bipolar transistors visit is like
and similarly so MOS transistors like n
MOS transistor P Mo's transistor as well
as C Mo's transistor each one having its
own features now has to be go with the
combined features of bipolar transistor
as well as C Mo's transistor there
should be available in bi C Mo's
transistor technology when we can
combine so MOS transistors as well as
bipolar transistors coming to the the
object to of this bipolar CMOS
transistor is
combined so bipolar I and so CMOS
transistor so as we exploit the
advantages of both the technologies in
the same transistor so today my CMOS has
become one of the most dominant
technologies used for high speed low
power and high functional VLSI circuits
the process step required for both CMOS
and bipolars are similar so the bipolar
CMOS transistor Big Sur process has same
been enhanced and so integrated into the
system was process without any
additional steps that means the same
process is needed for the bi CMOS
transistor as the same as so CMOS
transistor as well as by Perl
implementation and the primary approach
to realize high performance bi CMOS
devices is the addition of so bipolar
process steps to the baseline su CMOS
process the BI CMOS gates and could be
used as effective way of speeding of the
VLSI circuits the applications of BI
CMOS transistors are very wide and vast
applications in many applications were
using bi CMOS transistors nowadays and
all these applications we can discuss in
the latter slides and coming to the
advantages of bipolar and CMOS circuits
can be retained in bi CMOS chips
that means each bipolar transistor
having its own advantages and CMOS
transistors also having its own
advantages now it has to be combined the
common advantages as well as the
individual advantages or bipolar
transistors in CMOS transistors into the
BI CMOS transistors and friendly the bi
CMOS technology enables high performance
integrated circuits that is nothing but
Isis but increases the process
complexity okay by using this bi CMOS
technology we are improving the speed
but the complexity of designing should
be in is also be very more coming to the
what is the abstract of this see most bi
CMOS technology and the BI CMOS
technology is if
combination of bipolar on CMOS
transistor technologies and CMOS
technology offers the less power
dissipation smaller noise machines and
high packing density coming to the point
of view of CMOS technology it offers
only less amount of power and coming to
the high packing density that means it
by using the CMOS technology we can able
to place very more number of transistors
in the same IC that is approximately
around millions of transistors we can
able to place in a single IC and bipolar
technology on the other hand and she's
high switching and I was split input
output speed and good noise performance
that means the speed should be more as
compared to the CMOS technology the pay
paulo technology having speed now we are
in the third generation of BI CMOS
technology coming to the bi CMOS
technology accomplishes both improved
speed for CMOS and lower power
dissipation than the bipolar technology
simply by combining of both so CMOS and
bipolar technology the main drawback of
bi CMOS technology is the higher cost
due to the adder process complexity that
means individually for the
implementation of bipolar technology has
to use the process of bipolar usually
coming to the CMOS implementation we are
using the fabrication process only for
CMOS only so coming to the combination
of these both by bipolar and CMOS it has
to be used both people are in the
application process as well as CMOS
fabrication process the number of steps
are also be increases then the
complexity is also be more and coming to
the this greater process complexity in
bi CMOS results the cost increase
compared to the conventional CMOS
technology coming to the the
characteristics of CMOS technology what
are the characteristics we can listed
all the characteristics of CMOS
transistor technology as well as bi CMOS
in the next one and coming to the so
characteristics of CMOS technology
so lower statics power dissipation and
higher noise margin and higher packing
gains
that means we can able to place a
millions of transistors in the single IC
and high-heeled with large integrated
complex functions I am coming to I input
impedance with low dry current coming to
this scalable threshold voltage that
means very limited threshold voltage
have and high delay load things
sensitivity and low output to drive
current and coming to the low
transconductance an important point is
the bit is a bi-directional capability
so committing the CMOS technology
without drying source and gate coming to
you the source and runs both are
interchangeable we can use in India as a
source as a drain
that's what is a bi-directional
capability a new Idol switching device
and low gain and coming to the
characteristics of bipolar technology it
is higher switching speed as compared to
the CMOS system was having less in speed
switching speed and coming to the
bipolar having higher switching speed
and higher current to drive for unit
area and also be higher gain and
generally is a better noise performance
and better high frequency
characteristics in bipolar technology
improve I was speed and higher power
dissipation there is a drawback in this
bipolar the Shiva or come in she was
lower input impedance and lower packing
density because compared to the CMOS it
has higher packing density in CMOS
coming to bipolar technology it is low
packing density that means it is less
number of transistors you can place in
that and low delay sensitivity to low
and high transconductance the RISM it is
essentially unidirectional that means
you can use only one direction there is
the base terminal ship acts as a base
get in collector terminal ship acts as a
collector only and emitter terminal ship
act as an emitter only we are not able
to interchange the terminals but coming
in the CMOS
both the drain and source can be
interchangeable that's whether it's
called
bi-directional and this is one called
unitary
coming to the the combined advantages in
bi CMOS technology it follows that bi
CMOS technology goes somewhere towards
combining the services of both CMOS and
bipolar technologies improve speed so
over purely CMOS technology because he
must technology having speed is less
that's where has to be goeth by CMOS
bipolar technology speed and lower power
dissipation than the purely bipolar
bipolar technology required hype power
dissipation here the low power point can
be considered from the CMOS technology
inflexible high go for high performance
and improved current to drive lower CMOS
technology and improved packing density
over bipolar in CMOS technology we have
high packing density thus we can
consider the high packing from CMOS
technology is compared to the bipolar
and high input imprints low output
impedance and high gain and low noise
and this is the the Weisse CMOS
fabrication so that process simply can
absorb and this is the way polar in two
ways that is plain you there is top view
and this is the top view and this is so
cross sectional view and simply we can
observe here in this case we are using
the well process that is you are using
your n value and and this is solutely so
P substrate we are using over here this
is the P substrate and in this case the
well process we are using n substrate so
sorry and this is P substrate and Co and
this is the diffusion we are using here
that is P diffusion for the base contact
and this is n diffusion for emitter and
n diffusion for collectors simply you
can observe that is from emitter base
and collector n-type p-type and n-type
and diffusion pre diffusion and
diffusion simply resides in
NPN transistors bipolar and simply
observe here in this case so collector
emitter and base this is the
cross-sectional view simply you can
observe here the base is a P diffusion
emitted is n diffusion and collector is
also B n diffusion and this is so P
substrate which is used in the end well
and these are the some models for by
CMOS integrated circuits and these are
the simple models and coming to the
advantages of by CMOS technology so
improved speed over so CMOS CMOS
technology because bipolar transistors
having high in speed more speed compared
to the CMOS improved currently drive so
our CMOS and impose improved so packing
density over bipolar transistors and
lower power consumption than bipolar
transistors higher input impedance low
output impedance and finally high gain
and low noise machine these are the
advantages and coming to the
disadvantages increased manufacturing
process complexity the complexity should
be more as compared to the bipolar or
CMOS coming to a high cost should be
requires very high cost for the enter
designing or fabrication the speed
degradation due to scaling once you can
scaling down these the speed should be
decreases and longer fabrication cycle
time simply you can observe this is the
so fabrication cycle and initially it
has to be goeth so bipolar process after
them it has to be create well after then
gate oxide and poly and finally so CMOS
process has to be combine all these for
the formation of the BI CMOS transistor
so coming to the application solved by C
Mo's transistors okay those are so full
custom Isis and co these are so full
custom
Isis and Al automatic logic units and
barrel shifters and SRAM and DRAM static
Ram as well as DRAM and microprocessors
and microcontrollers and he's also be
used in so semi custom integrated
circuits and some of the very important
applications in resistors flip-flops and
standard cells and that has mixers and
analog to digital converters digital to
analog converters and gate arrays and
finally so flash analog-to-digital
converters okay now has to be go with
the comparison between so basic CMOS and
bi CMOS transistors in compared to in
terms of speed delay and area and see
how as compared to the CMOS by see by
suppose having higher swing speed as
compared to CMOS and coming to the soda
Lane simply we can observe here for the
same was having high delay by coming to
the bison was having less him delay and
similarly here as compared to area so
CMOS having somewhat higher area
required for by CMOS less area into
these are the three comparisons in terms
of speed delay and area these are the
simple products or divide by design for
by CMOS and finally thank you